An unweighted network can be described by an **Adjacency matrix** of dimension NxN, where N are the elements. If the network is undirected the matrix is symmetrical otherwise (directed network) is asymmetrical.
We call **density** the ratio between number of nodes and edges:$$\rho ={Edges\over N(N-1)}\ \  \ \ \ directed \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \rho ={Edges\over {N(N-1)\over 2}}\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ undirected$$
## Topological measures of networks
- **Average distance**: Distance between 2 nodes is the minimum number of edges between the 2 nodes, so the average distance **L** of a network is the sum of all distances computed among every pair of nodes normalized by the total number of node pairs: $$L={\sum_{A,B}l(A,B)\over N(N-1)}\ \ \ \ directed \ \ \ \ {\sum_{A,B}l(A,B)\over N(N-1)/2}\ \ \ \ undirected$$
- **Diameter**: is the **maximum** length among all distances between 2 pair of nodes in the network
- **Clustering coefficient**: It quantifies the "local link density" of the network by counting the number of triangles (basically 3 nodes connected to each other):$$c_i={{\# \ of \ \ triangles \ \ connected \ \ to \ \ i}\over{\# \ of \ \ triplets \ \ j,i,l \ \ centered \ \ on \ \ i}}={e_{k_i} \over k_i(k_i -1)/2}$$Where $k_i$ is the total number of connections that i has and $e_{k_i}$ is the number of links directly connecting the neighbors of i. The global clustering coefficient is the sum of all the clustering coefficients divided by the number of total nodes.
- **Centrality measures (degree, closeness, betweenness and eigenvectors)**
- **Degree distribution**: It specifies the fraction of the network nodes that have exactly degree *k* and is basically the probability of picking one node at random with degree k. $$P(k)={\# \  of \ nodes \ with \ degree \ k \over N}$$It's often used to consider the cumulative degree where we want the number of nodes with degree k or more. Degree is an important metrics because for example a constant degree distribution defines homogeneous networks while the opposite defines a scale-free network.
## Centrality measures
- Degree centrality: The importance of a network node can be captured (trivially) by the amount of neighbors it has. We call network "**hubs**" the most central nodes of a network. 
- **Closeness centrality**: A node of a network is central if on average is close to all other nodes of the network, meaning it has better access to the network information, more direct influence on other nodes etc. we define the closeness centrality of a node as: $$c_i={1\over l_i}={n-1\over \sum_j d_{ij}}$$If a network is directed we must distinguish between in and out closeness of a node. In general closeness is high if distance is low. If the network is weighted we have generalized definitions that are non trivial and not relevant for this course.
- **Betweenness centrality**: Fraction of shortest paths connecting all pairs of nodes of the network that pass through the node i: $$b_i=\sum_{j,k}{n. of \ shortest \ paths\ connecting \ j,k \ via \ i\over n. of \ shortest \ paths\ connecting \ j,k}=\sum_{j,k}{n_{jk}(i)\over n_{jk}}$$Basically expressing the percentage of not directly connected nodes that pass through the node i to reach one another.
- **Eigenvector centrality**: The eigenvector centrality 𝛾𝑖 of a network node i is (proportional to) the sum of the centralities of the node neighbors.
## Scale-free Networks
Scale free networks operate by having few very connected nodes and many scarcely connected nodes. For large number of nodes N the degree distribution is a power law function $P(k)\sim k^{-\alpha}$ the network is strongly heterogeneous. For very big N the average degree tends to $2*E$ and the degree distribution tends to the power law $P(k)\sim k^{-3}$ and the clustering coefficient tends to 0.
## Small-World networks
Are a class of networks that are “highly clustered, like regular lattices, yet have small characteristic path lengths, like random graphs.” They are between random and regular graphs, very good at imitating real life phenomena. it tends to maintain a very high clustering coefficient.
To build a small world network we start from a regular lattice like the ring network, then we delete some edges and reconnect them to another random node. it’s not random but it’s not regular anymore.

