Probably the origin of [[Genetics]], in this chapter we will discuss the process and inference generated by Mendel's work.
## Monohybrid cross
The first experiment Mendel did was to **cross** plants that differed for only 1 discrete character (e.g. green or yellow seeds).
The hybrids were all equal, showing only 1 trait which Mendel called **dominant**. This was **First mendel's law**^firstMendelLaw
By crossing the second generation individuals with themselves, the trait that was missing reappeared in the new generation, although in smaller numbers. Mendel called this trait **recessive**.
Mendel hypothesized that the obtained results were caused by inheritance factors. Nowadays we know that this factors are called **Genes** (see [[Genome]]) and their various forms are called **Alleles**.

An individual is called **Homozygote** if it has 2 alleles of only 1 type, while it's called **Heterozygote** if it's hybrid. 
The genetic configuration of an individual (meaning the allelic composition) is called **[[Genotype]]**, while the appearance of the individual is called the **[[Phenotype]]**.

## Second Mendel's law
Also known as **Law of segregation** it states that each individual produces equal quantity of gametes with one or the other allele and during fecundation gametes combines randomly. 

Given that, the ratio of expression of 1 trait is always 3:1, since the distribution is 1RR:2Rr:1rr.

## Third Mendel's law
When incrementing the number of discrete characters observed, the ratios changes accordingly with a simple mathematical combination: 9:3:3:1.

## Genes and Chromosomes
After time passed it was discovered that genes are located on [[Chromosomes]], but this conflicts with Mendel's second law, since the traits in an organism are a low higher then the number of chromosomes, meaning that each chromosome must have more than one gene, consequently these genes cannot be inherited independently. 
It was later discovered that there is in fact an association among different alleles, but it's not total. 

## Crossing-over
The non-totality of the association is due to a process called **Crossing over**: During [[Meiosis]] homolog chromosomes, one male and one female, can exchange genetic material creating recombined chromosomes thus making those recombined genes not associated anymore. The point in which the recombination occurs is called **Chiasm**.
The probability that two genes are separated by crossing over is dependent on the distance between the two. 

## Gene interactions
Genes do not act totally independently, and this can cause unpredicted phenotypes or segregations that are not expected according to Mendel's laws. 
Some of these effects are:
- **Incomplete dominance**
- **Co-dominance**
- **Polygenic inheritance**
As some examples, there can be heterozygote individuals who have an intermediate trait that is between the parents one (crossing one red and one white "four o'clock" flower will result in a pink flower instead of a red flower). This phenomena is **Incomplete dominance**. Another case is the blood, where there can be an AB group, which is an example of **Co-dominance**. Finally, there are some traits that are not discrete, but change in a "continuous way" (for example skin color or height). these traits are called "**polygenic**".
A phenotype can also be influenced by the environment, meaning that the gene expresses the potential of a trait, but the environment can influence the actual expression of the trait.

## Genes of population
While Mendel's laws point out the principles of inheritance, they cannot scale well when applied to entire populations. **Populations' genetics** evaluate via statistical analysis the frequency of presence of different genes in a population.
Contrary to what Mendel states, recessive traits do not disappear with the passing of time.

