While the original, called FASTA is a heuristic program that searches only for global homology there are also 2 versions called **LFASTA** and **PLFASTA** that search for local homology of sequences. 
FASTA uses 4 phases to perform the search:
- first a *positional table* containing all the positions for each amino acid (or nucleotide) in the query sequence and in the database (for each sequence) is created. We then calculate the difference of positional values of each amino acid (or nucleotide, not repeating this again) between the query sequence and the ones in the database to find the *most common offset*. After that we make the regions (meaning subsequences with diagonal matches) grow until a negative score is reached. the 10 best regions of similarity are then selected for the next phase.
- The 10 best regions selected before are evaluated through the score matrices ([[Pairwise alignment]]) and we identify the sub regions with the bases that maximize the region score. We call those sub regions initial regions and the scores obtained **INIT1**. We aim to reach the initial region with the best score to be used to create a rank of the subsequences in the database in order to define which of them are the most similar to the query sequence.
- The program then evaluates if it's possible to join together different regions of similarity. There are various constraints to this operation, so the joining is done only if the cost to be paid (for joining) is less then what is gained through the union. The new score is called **INITN**
- The program aligns sequences with higher similarity to the query sequence using a modified Smith Waterman algorithm that allows to obtain an optimized score called **OPT**
with the OPT score we can perform analysis and even calculate the Z score.